# Abelfunctions Developer's Guide

Want to contribute to Abelfunctions? Excellent! This document presents some
useful information on how to get started. This guide assumes that, at the very
least, you know how to write [Sage](http://www.sagemath.org) code, how to use
[git](http://git-scm.com), and that you have a [GitHub](http://www.github.com)
account.

Found a bug but don't want to fix it yourself? Simply create an Issue over on
the [Issues Page](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/issues).

### Contents

* [Workflow](#workflow)
* [Abelfunctions Overview](#abelfunctions-overview)
  * [Algebraic Half](#algebraic-half)
  * [Geometric Half](#geometric-half)
* [Writing Tests](#writing-tests)

## Workflow

Use the suggested workflow below when contributing to Abelfunctions. This
workflow follows the standard
[Fork-Commit-Pull Request workflow](https://guides.github.com/activities/contributing-to-open-source/)
used in many GitHub projects. To begin, before making any changes or
improvements, follow the instructions at
[GitHub - Fork a Repo](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo/) to create
a personal "fork" of Abelfunctions on GitHub. You only need to do this once.

Abelfunctions uses [`ruff`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/) for formatting and linting. It's recommented to configure this to run on save in your editor of choice. You can also install [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/#installation) to automatically run `ruff` when you commit your changes.

1. **Create a new branch:**

   Create a new branch in which to commit your changes. This way, you always
   have a clean copy of the code in `master`.
   
   ```
   $ git checkout -b my-branch-name
   ```
   
2. **Make changes:**

   Remember to add tests to the test suite, especially when fixing a bug. See
   [Writing Tests](#writing-tests), below.

3. **Test changes:**

   Now that you've made your changes and written your tests, build and test
   Abelfunctions. This will run the entire test suite, checking for any
   propagating issues that may have cropped up.

   ```
   $ sage setup.py build_ext --inplace
   $ sage runtests.py
   ```

4. **Commit:**

   Commit your changes to your working branch. Repeat steps 2-4 if there are
   multiple "chunks" of work that need to be done. Ideally, each commit is for a
   separate unit of work. Also ideally, each commit results in working code.
   
5. **Push and create pull request:**

   Push your changes to a remote branch.
   
   ```
   $ git push origin my-branch-name
   ```

   Then, create a "Pull Request" of this remote branch against the main
   Ablefunctions repo. Read more about Pull Requests at
   [GitHub - Using pull requests](https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests/).
   If during discussion some additional commits are needed to call the issue or
   enhancement "resolved" simply push them to the same remote branch.

## Abelfunctions Overview

Here we describe the library from a high-level perspective, outlining the
different major components and how they interact with each other. For details
about a particular module, class, or function, please see the source code of the
corresponding module.

*(Aside: I still need to figure out how to get Sphinx to interface with external
Sage packages and libraries, such as Abelfunctions, how how best to host the
output HTML documentation.)*

Abelfunctions follows a more-or-less standard Python / Sage package layout:

```
abelfunctions/
  abelfunctions/    # Sage library source files
  doc/              # Abelfunctions documentation
  example/          # Example usage scripts
  notebooks/        # Demonstration notebooks
  .travis.yml       # TravisCI test configuration
  runtests.py       # Script for running Ablfunctions tests
  setup.py          # Installation script
```

The core functionality of Abelfunctions can be partitioned into two halves: the
"algebraic half" and the "geometric half". These two halves are joined by the
[`RiemannSurface`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/riemann_surface.py)
class and used by other components of the Abelfunctions package.

### Algebraic Half

* **Primary Goal:** compute a basis for holomorphic differentials on a Riemann
  surface.
* **Secondary Goals:**
  * compute Puiseux series,
  * compute the singularity structure of a curve.
  
  
#### Overview
  
The module
[`abelfunctions/differentials.py`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/differentials.py)
defines the function `differentials()` which returns a basis of holomorphic
differentials on a Riemann surface as well as a class `Differential` which is
the base class for any differential defined on a Riemann surface.

The function `differentials()` calls `differentials_numerators()` which in turn
uses `recenter_curve()` and `mnuk_conditions()` to determine the numerators of
the holomorphic differentials. Note that the denominators are all equal to the
derivative of the curve with respect to the dependent variable. These use
functionality provided by
[`integralbasis.py`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/integralbasis.py),
[`singularities.py`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/singularities.py),
and
[`puiseux.py`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/puiseux.py)
which compute integral bases of algebraic function fields, the singularity
structure of algebraic curves, and Puiseux series expansions about points on a
curve, respectively.

*A note about Puiseux series:* at the time of the development of this code Sage
did not have a built-in Pusieux series object which fit in to the Sage coercion
model. I developed the concept of a ring of Pusieux series over a given base
ring as well as the arithmetic of their elements. At the time of this writing
some folks in the Sage community are merging my code into the Sage code base.
See [Trac # 4618](http://trac.sagemath.org/ticket/4618) for information. This
work is separate from the task of computing a Puiseux series expansion of a
curve about some point.

### Geometric Half

* **Primary Goal:** compute a basis for the first homology group of a Riemann
  surface.
* **Secondary Goals:**
  * compute the monodromy group of a curve,
  * establish a framework for constructing paths on a Riemann surface.

Although the primary goal is the compute particular paths on a Riemann surface
the code has been written to compute general paths on Riemann surfaces. This is
particularly useful for computing the Abel map at an arbitrary place.

The most fundamental objects `ComplexPathPrimitive` and `ComplexPath` are
defined in
[`complex_path.pyx`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/complex_path.pyx).
These are used to define paths and segments of paths in the complex x-plane. The
objects defined in this module follow the
[composite pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composite_pattern) from
object-oriented programming design. In this situation, `ComplexPathPrimitive`
plays the role of the base *component*, `ComplexPath` is the *composite*, and
`ComplexPathLine`, `Arc`, and `Ray` are all *leaves*.

From a `ComplexPath` we can create a `RiemannSurfacePath` as defined in
[`riemann_surface_path.pyx`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/riemann_surface_path.pyx).
The role of a `RiemannSurfacePath` is to define how to lift a path to the
Riemann surface using (currently) either analytic continuation via
`RiemannSurfacePathSmale` or Puiseux series via `RiemannSurfacePathPuiseux`.
These also follow a composite design pattern with `RiemannSurfacePathPrimitive`
as the base *component*, `RiemannSurfacePath` as the *composite*, and `Smale`
and `Puiseux` as *leaves*. We use this pattern to hide the implementation
details of which analytic continuation technique is being used in a path as well
as making it easy to have one technique used on one part of a path and a
different technique on another. (For example, we want to use fast numerical
analytic continuation when away from the branch points of a curve.) Other types
of analytic continuation techniques can be created by constructing a new leaf
class and overloading the `analytically_continue()` method.

Finally, management of the creation of these paths is performed by a
`RiemannSurfacePathFactory` defined in
[`riemann_surface_path_factory.py`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/riemann_surface_path_factory.py).
This is an attempt to abstract out the implementation of the requests of
different kinds of paths, such as monodromy paths, a- and b-cycles, paths to
particular places on a Riemann surface. Currently, only one implementation of
`RiemannSurfacePathFactory` exists but more factories can be added. For example,
Issue #126 proposes a path creation strategy which uses the Voronoi
decomposition of the branch locus to efficiently compute the monodromy group of
a curve. Some modifications need to be made to `RiemannSurface` to allow the
user to choose different factories. (Or choose a default factory for the user
since many of them will most likely not care.)

It seems silly at first to allow the implementation of multiple strategies but,
for the purposes of testing and performance comparisons it is a good idea to
keep multiple strategies around. Besides, future updates may change the
performance of different strategies.

## Writing Tests

Abelfunctions uses the built-in Python
[unittest](https://docs.python.org/2.7/library/unittest.html) module for
automated testing. The quickest way to learn how to write unit tests is to
follow the syntax in an existing test suite module, such as the one for testing
Riemann surface paths:
[`test_riemann_surface_path.py`](https://github.com/abelfunctions/abelfunctions/blob/master/abelfunctions/tests/test_riemann_surface_path.py).

To run the test suite simply execute

```
$ sage runtests.py
```

from the top-level directory. To only run the test suite on certain modules you
can optionally supply a partial filename. For example,

```
$ sage runtests.py puiseux
```

will run the test suite on every module matching the expression
"`test_*puiseux*.py`".

New test suite modules are automatically detected as long as the module name
begins with `test_` and lives in a `test/` directory. When creating a new
`TestCase` object in either a new module or an existing be sure to inherit from
`abelfunctions.tests.test_abelfunctions.AbelfunctionsTestCase`.

Every remote branch and pull request will create a new
[TravisCI instance](https://travis-ci.org/abelfunctions/abelfunctions) so that
you'll be notified if your contribution passes tests.
